Update Travel fellowship page to include remote participation and selection criteria (#79)
OBF/obf-docs: Travel_fellowships.md

# Open Bioinformatics Foundation Event Fellowships

The Open Bioinformatics Foundation ([OBF](https://www.open-bio.org)) promoting open source bioinformatics software development and open science in the biological research community. 
The OBF Event Fellowship program is aimed at increasing diverse participation at events promoting open science practices such as resource development and dissemination in the bioinformatics and biological research community.

These fellowships are available to support both in-person and remote (virtual) participation at events such as conferences, workshops, training courses or collaborative development sprints.

## Application deadlines

There are two rounds of applications with the following **application deadlines**:

- Round-1: 1 April
- Round-2: 1 October

The calls for applications are announced through a [blog post on the website](https://www.open-bio.org/blog/), [official mailing list](https://mailman.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/open-bio-announce) and [Twitter](https://twitter.com/obf_news).

## Application form

> The applications are submitted for each round via [this application form](https://forms.gle/evzK6wBN8XtnGLUMA).

Author: ```suggestion
The applications are submitted for each round via [this application form](https://forms.gle/evzK6wBN8XtnGLUMA).

We have created [a word template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tgzkHS84L8m3RwYoL7X86Axb6p_OiqNWaoJpiV4q8S0/edit?usp=sharing) of the form, which can be used for creating a draft of your application. 
Please make a copy or download this document as a '.docx' file.

If Google Forms are not accessible from your geographical location, you can submit your application by sharing the filled version of this document by email to the fellowship chair.
```

Author: Can someone check the wording for the template?

Reviewer: looks good to me!

# Open Bioinformatics Foundation Event Fellowships

> The Open Bioinformatics Foundation ([OBF](https://www.open-bio.org)) offers the OBF Event Fellowship program aimed at increasing diverse participation at events promoting open science practices such as resource development and dissemination in the bioinformatics and biological research community.

Author: Looks good.

> The Open Bioinformatics Foundation ([OBF](https://www.open-bio.org)) offers the OBF Event Fellowship program aimed at increasing diverse participation at events promoting open science practices such as resource development and dissemination in the bioinformatics and biological research community.

Author: Updated as suggested by Yo.

> The OBF Event Fellowship program is aimed at increasing diverse participation at events promoting open science practices such as resource development and dissemination in the bioinformatics and biological research community.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to keep closer to the original wording with "open source bioinformatics" or at least "open source" in the text. This term does appear again later though.

Author: Thanks @peterjc. Can you please edit in your suggestions? I don't know where exactly this comment refers to.

Reviewer 3: If the green shows suggested new text, there's a typo that needs to be fixed:
"The Open Bioinformatics Foundation ([OBF](https://www.open-bio.org)) promoting open source" - should be "promotes"

These fellowships are available to support both in-person and remote (virtual) participation at events such as conferences, workshops, training courses or collaborative development sprints.

## Application deadlines

There are two rounds of applications with the following **application deadlines**:

- Round-1: 1 April
- Round-2: 1 October

The calls for applications are announced through a [blog post on the website](https://www.open-bio.org/blog/), [official mailing list](https://mailman.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/open-bio-announce) and [Twitter](https://twitter.com/obf_news).

## Application form

The applications are submitted for each round via [this application form](https://forms.gle/evzK6wBN8XtnGLUMA).

Applicants will be asked to supply the following information:

### Personal information

> The applicants will supply personal information such as name, email id, career stage, and affiliation.

Reviewer 3: email id -> email address

> This information will not be shared with the review panel but will be used by the fellowship chair to identify who the applicants are.

Author: In the last rounds, I have not shared names but application number (as their applications come in), but I shared their diversity statements and GitHub details.

OBF Event Fellowships are intended to enable awardees to participate in events that promote open source bioinformatics and/or open science. 
In an open text response (maximum 250 words), applicants are asked to describe how this event and their participation in it relate to these goals.

### Open Source Resources

OBF promotes the development of open-source bioinformatics software, documentation, or other content useful for research communities. 
In this section, applicants are asked to provide a link to an online repository and evidence of open-source licensing. 

They are further expected to describe the project that their participation in the event involves (either because they are presenting, co-developing, or because the event involves activities around this topic).
If they cannot provide links to specific resources and licenses, then they can describe how their participation furthers open science practices.

### Promoting diversity and representation

> One of the goals of the OBF fellowship is to increase participation from groups otherwise underrepresented in the community or at the event, including but not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (country of residence and citizenship), ethnic background (historically underrepresented and other minority groups), career stages, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

Author: @nlharris does the suggestion made by Yo (and now integrated in the document) address your comment?
> One of the goals of the OBF fellowship is to increase participation from groups otherwise underrepresented at the event or in the broader community, including but not limited to underrepresented country of residence or origin, ethnic background (historically underrepresented and other minority groups), career stages, sexuality, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

> One of the goals of the OBF fellowship is to increase participation from groups otherwise underrepresented in the community or at the event, including but not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (country of residence and citizenship), ethnic background (historically underrepresented and other minority groups), career stages, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

Author: @nlharris I am resolving this to see how the rendered file looks like on the website. We can come back and discuss this if needed.

In an open text response, applicants can describe how their participation in this event help increase diversity and representation of any marginalised and traditionally underrepresented group in the OVERALL open source bioinformatics and/or open science community.

Note that applicants may have an answer to this question even if they are not personally a member of an underrepresented group. 
This section is important for the evaluation of their application.

### Justification for funding

The OBF Event Fellowships are available for the awardees to cover conference registration fees and other participation related costs of up to USD $1,000. 

>   - For the in-person events, this fellowship can be used to cover airfare, transportation and hotel. 

Reviewer 2: This seems to duplicate (and differs from) the section below about what is covered.

  - For the virtual events, applicants can seek support for small hardware, internet cost for the duration of the event, or other supporting materials

Applicants are asked to provide details of the items they would like to pay for through the OBF Event fellowship. 
Here, they can provide as much detail as possible to help the review panel make a fair recommendation for the fellowship awardees.

Please see the next section for more details.

## What does the event fellowship cover?

The OBF Event Fellowships are available for the awardees to cover conference registration fees and other participation related costs of up to USD $1,000. 

### Items covered for in-person participation

The fellowship can be used to cover conference registration fees and direct travel costs (such as airfare, train, metro, bus and taxi), hotel, and/or child-care up to a value of USD 1,000. 
Note that rental car expenses and personal car mileage are not eligible for reimbursement. 

> If you anticipate that you would require more than USD 1,000 in order to attend the event, please include that information on the application form and contact the fellowship chair.

Reviewer 3: i think this is the point where the document suddenly switches from the third person ("the applicant") to the second ("you"). i suggest choosing one of those and using it consistently throughout.

### Items covered for remote participation

The fellowship can be used to cover conference registration fees and the costs of small hardware (such as Microphone, speaker and webcam), childcare for the duration of the event and/or other supporting materials.

The cost of remote participation will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

> For example, we are aware that due to the load-shedding issues in many developing countries, our applicants might require to pay for the fuel for the generator to keep their electricity running for the duration of the event.

Reviewer 3: require to pay -> need to pay. (for some reason, the verb "require" doesn't work before another verb; it is used before nouns, like "require payment" (which is not quite the right phrase here))

> For example, we are aware that due to the load-shedding issues in many developing countries, our applicants might require to pay for the fuel for the generator to keep their electricity running for the duration of the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we are aware that due to the load-shedding issues in many developing countries, our applicants might need to pay for the fuel for the generator to keep their electricity running for the duration of the event.
```

Similarly, the cost of high-speed internet may vary across countries and may also be requested by applicants from many developing countries.

> You are eligible to apply for the cost of a communication platform only if you are hosting a virtual event and will require a paid subscription to access the full feature of the tool.

Reviewer 3: so only hosting, not attending?
full feature -> full features
unclear what "the tool" is, i think you mean something like Remo but this may need to be rephrased.

When applying for the cost of hardware, please note that this fellowship will not cover the cost of buying laptops and computers.

> However, this fellowship will pay for the rental cost of the large hardware required to attend or host a virtual event.

Reviewer 3: will pay for -> may cover

Author: Integrated this in the main text

The cost will be capped to a maximum of $40 (USD) each for small hardware such as headphones, webcam, speaker, and/microphone.

> You are welcome to negotiate the cost of your hardware with the fellowship chair if the maximum cap is insufficient for you.

Reviewer 3: i would take this out, or, if you want to leave it in, don't put "negotiate with the fellowship chair" and say "If the cap is insufficient, applicants can describe their hardware needs in their application."

> If you anticipate that you would require more than USD 1,000 to cover your overall cost, please contact the fellowship chair with the details.

Reviewer 2: Apply any changes to the in-person $1000 cap note here too.

Author: I removed it for the remote event.

## Review process

### Role of the fellowship chair (and review timeline)

> The fellowship chair will make sure that the call for applications is announced at least 6 weeks before the deadline by editing and updating the application form for each round, drafting a blog post, coordinating with the newsletter chair and receiving approval from the OBF board members.

Reviewer 3: remove "editing and"

> The fellowship chair will make sure that the call for applications is announced at least 6 weeks before the deadline by editing and updating the application form for each round, drafting a blog post, coordinating with the newsletter chair and receiving approval from the OBF board members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fellowship chair will make sure that the call for applications is announced at least 6 weeks before the deadline by updating the application form for each round, drafting a blog post, coordinating with the newsletter chair and receiving approval from the OBF board members.
```

> After the application period is over, they will coordinate with the OBF board members to invite volunteers to serve in the review panel and create all the required documents such as applications (minus the personal information) and reviewing form with rubrics to share with the panel.

Reviewer 3: ah, this addresses my question above about applicant names being hidden from the reviewers. i guess the chair will assign some sort of ID or alias to applicants.

Author: yes. should this be explained above?

In the first week after the deadline, the review panel will be asked to review all or selected applications (based on the number of applications for that round).

In the second week, the fellowship chair will create a summary of the scores and discuss it with the board members to identify the awardees for that round.

> Preferably, by the beginning of the third week, the fellowship chair will inform the selected asking for confirmation regarding the fellowship acceptance and informing them of their responsibilities for getting reimbursed for their expense after they have participated in the event of their choice.

Reviewer 3: inform the selected asking -> inform the chosen awardees
their responsibilities for -> the process for
the event of their choice -> the event.  (don't want to make it sound like now they can choose a different event!)

> Preferably, by the beginning of the third week, the fellowship chair will inform the selected asking for confirmation regarding the fellowship acceptance and informing them of their responsibilities for getting reimbursed for their expense after they have participated in the event of their choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preferably, by the beginning of the third week, the fellowship chair will inform the chosen awardees asking for confirmation regarding the fellowship acceptance and informing them of the process for getting reimbursed for their expense after they have participated in the event.
```

They will also inform the applicants who were not selected and provide feedback so that they can reapply for the next round with an improved application.

Upon confirmation, a public blog post will be drafted by the fellowship chair informing the community of the current awardees.
Internally, they will also maintain communication with the awardees helping them publish their post-event blog post and sorting their reimbursement with the help of the OBF treasurer.

### Review panel

The review panel is drawn for every round of applications from the OBF Board members and volunteers based on their availability. 
Any panelist with a clear *conflict of interest*[1] will recuse themselves from deliberation. 

> [1] Conflict of interest will occur when a reviewer comes across an application from an applicant they know (identifiable by the project description or online repository).

Reviewer 2: The use of "will" here seems too strong. Just because I know who the person is, does not necessary mean there is a conflict. How about:

[1] A conflict of interest may occur despite the anonymization if the applicant is known to the reviewer via the project description or online repository.

Author: Updated with this suggestion

### Selection criteria

The selection of the fellowship awardees is based on the criteria described below. 
Please make sure that you include sufficient information in your application to allow the review panel to assess your eligibility fairly.

***A rubric is currently under development, which will be added to this page upon approval from the OBF board members.***

#### Event and nature of your participation

The review panel will assess how the event that you have selected and the nature of your participation promote open science practices in bioinformatics and/or biological research community.

> It's important to keep in mind that the event is scheduled to occur anytime in a one-year window starting one month after the application deadline.

Reviewer 3: event is scheduled -> event should be scheduled

> It's important to keep in mind that the event is scheduled to occur anytime in a one-year window starting one month after the application deadline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to keep in mind that the event should be scheduled to occur anytime in a one-year window starting one month after the application deadline.
```

**Event of your choice**

> Events that are eligible may include but are not limited to, conferences, workshops, code fests, hackathons, training courses, collaborative sprints, informal meet-ups or other skill-building and networking event. 

Reviewer 3: limited to, -> limited to

> Events that are eligible may include but are not limited to, conferences, workshops, code fests, hackathons, training courses, collaborative sprints, informal meet-ups or other skill-building and networking event. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events that are eligible may include but are not limited to conferences, workshops, code fests, hackathons, training courses, collaborative sprints, informal meet-ups or other skill-building and networking event. 
```

> If you intend to attend OBF events (BOSC and BCC) and other events hosted by the member projects, your application may be given a slight preference.

Reviewer 3: BOSC and BCC -> BOSC and/or the OBF CoFest

> If you intend to attend OBF events (BOSC and BCC) and other events hosted by the member projects, your application may be given a slight preference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you intend to attend OBF events BOSC and/or the OBF CoFest and other events hosted by the member projects, your application may be given a slight preference.
```

**Nature of your participation**

The review panel will look at the nature of your participation (your role) at the event.

> For example, you may be hosting the event, giving a talk, chairing a session, running a Birds of a Feather discussion, offering a training event, facilitating a sprint (or similar session), leading a project at a code fest/hackathon, presenting a poster, participating in a panel discussion, reviewing abstracts for the event, contribute to the event as a co-organiser, or volunteer to help the organisation committee during the event.

Reviewer 3: contribute -> contributing
volunteer -> volunteering

> For example, you may be hosting the event, giving a talk, chairing a session, running a Birds of a Feather discussion, offering a training event, facilitating a sprint (or similar session), leading a project at a code fest/hackathon, presenting a poster, participating in a panel discussion, reviewing abstracts for the event, contribute to the event as a co-organiser, or volunteer to help the organisation committee during the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you may be hosting the event, giving a talk, chairing a session, running a Birds of a Feather discussion, offering a training event, facilitating a sprint (or similar session), leading a project at a code fest/hackathon, presenting a poster, participating in a panel discussion, reviewing abstracts for the event, contributing to the event as a co-organiser, or volunteering to help the organisation committee during the event.
```

#### Open Source Resources

> The review panel may look at your general involvement in the open source development (such as your GitHub contributions to the Open Source project) or open science communities (for example, your previous work advocating for open practices and diversity).

Reviewer 3: the open source -> open source

> The review panel may look at your general involvement in the open source development (such as your GitHub contributions to the Open Source project) or open science communities (for example, your previous work advocating for open practices and diversity).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The review panel may look at your general involvement in open source development (such as your GitHub contributions to the Open Source project) or open science communities (for example, your previous work advocating for open practices and diversity).
```

Any information regarding your past participation in the project that you are representing will be useful for evaluating your application as well.
Therefore, please supply the link of the public repository or online resources that will help the panel in the review process.

This will not be a limiting factor if you are new to bioinformatics and open science and express your enthusiasm and willingness to learn and practice open science principles learned from the event of your choice and OBF community.

> #### Promoting diversity and representation

Reviewer 3: this is somewhat redundant with the earlier diversity text

Author: The above section is about application and this section is about reviewing therefore the repeatition.

The review panel will look at how your attendance will contribute to increasing diversity at the event.
We understand increasing diversity as increasing participation of members from groups traditionally underrepresented in the bioinformatics, computation or tech community or at the event.

> This includes but not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (members from many developing nations), ethnic origins, career stages, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

Reviewer 3: includes but not -> includes but is not

> This includes but not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (members from many developing nations), ethnic origins, career stages, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes but is not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (members from many developing nations), ethnic origins, career stages, sexuality, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.
```

If you are not from a minority or underrepresented group but have a track record for advocating for diversity as an ally through your work or involvement in the event of your choice, you are welcome to apply for this fellowship as well.

> *We do not consider the diversity of operating systems, programming languages or text editors as a criterion for the OBF Travel fellowship.*

Reviewer 3: text editors, hahaha!
i suggest replacing that with "scientific domain" (e.g. "I work on Acanthoscurria genetics, not many people work on that")

Reviewer 2: +1.

Also "Travel fellowship" to "Event Fellowship".

> *We do not consider the diversity of operating systems, programming languages or text editors as a criterion for the OBF Travel fellowship.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*We do not consider the diversity of operating systems, programming languages or scientific domain as a criterion for the OBF event fellowship.*
```

## Announcement of the application outcome

Applicants will be notified of the outcome no later than 3 weeks after the application deadline.

Those who receive the fellowship award will be able to discuss any further details with the fellowship chair and/or the OBF board members.

> Applicants who are unsuccessful in a round will be provided with the feedback.

Reviewer: I agree - if people ask for feedback it's reasonable to consider this, but sometimes we've had a large number of applicants. pro-actively sending feedback creates a huge burden for the chair.

> Applicants who are unsuccessful in a round will be provided with the feedback.

Author: I have updated this with "Applicants who are unsuccessful in a round can request for feedback." and have included more explanation below as a comment.

> They will be able to apply again with a revised and updated application for the next round of event fellowship.

Reviewer 3: for the next round of event fellowship -> in the next round.

> They will be able to apply again with a revised and updated application for the next round of event fellowship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They will be able to apply again with a revised and updated application in the next round.
```

## Responsibilities of the fellowship awardees

> We expect that your participation in the event will promote open science practices in software development, training, documentation, publication and collaborative efforts in the biological research community, and will ideally promote diversity in their communities. 

Reviewer 3: already said earlier, but maybe ok here as a summary

Author: I am adding it here so that I can share the link to this section directly with the awardees listing what is expected of them.

After the event, the awardees are required to write a blog post on the [OBF blog](https://www.open-bio.org/category/travel-fellowship/) about their experience attending the event and describing the main outcomes of their participation.

The fellowship chair will help create a WordPress account on the OBF website where they will provide editorial support for publishing the blog post. 
Please note that this should be completed within three weeks after the event ends, and is a prerequisite before the awardee can receive payment.

> Meanwhile, the awardees will be put in touch with the OBF treasurer who will share the reimbursement form and help sort out the expense as per the guideline shared with them.

Reviewer 3: expense -> expenses
guideline shared with them -> guidelines.

> Meanwhile, the awardees will be put in touch with the OBF treasurer who will share the reimbursement form and help sort out the expense as per the guideline shared with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meanwhile, the awardees will be put in touch with the OBF treasurer who will share the reimbursement form and help sort out the expenses as per the guidelines shared with them.
```

> If due to any reason, their circumstances change and they can no longer attend the said event or accept the fellowship award, they should discuss the details with the fellowship chair and/or the board members.

Reviewer 3: If due to any reason, their -> If, for any reason, the awardee's

> If due to any reason, their circumstances change and they can no longer attend the said event or accept the fellowship award, they should discuss the details with the fellowship chair and/or the board members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If due to any reason, the awardee's circumstances change and they can no longer attend the said event or accept the fellowship award, they should discuss the details with the fellowship chair and/or the board members.
```

## Reimbursement

> The OBF will reimburse the recipient after the event based on receipts provided and proof of attendance. 

Author: ```suggestion
The OBF will reimburse the recipient after the event based on receipts provided and proof of attendance have been submitted to the OBF treasurer. 
```

> The OBF will reimburse the recipient after the event based on receipts provided and proof of attendance have been submitted to the OBF treasurer. 

Reviewer 3: add "and the blog post about the event has been finished."

> The OBF will reimburse the recipient after the event based on receipts provided and proof of attendance have been submitted to the OBF treasurer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OBF will reimburse the recipient after the event based on receipts provided, proof of attendance has been submitted to the OBF treasurer, and the blog post about the event has been finished.
```

Author: Replacing finished -> published

### Open Source Resources

OBF promotes the development of open-source bioinformatics software, documentation, or other content useful for research communities. 
In this section, applicants are asked to provide a link to an online repository and evidence of open-source licensing. 

They are further expected to describe the project that their participation in the event involves (either because they are presenting, co-developing, or because the event involves activities around this topic).
If they cannot provide links to specific resources and licenses, then they can describe how their participation furthers open science practices.

### Promoting diversity and representation

One of the goals of the OBF fellowship is to increase participation from groups otherwise underrepresented in the community or at the event, including but not limited to underrepresented demographic groups (country of residence and citizenship), ethnic background (historically underrepresented and other minority groups), career stages, gender identity and expression, and people with disabilities.

> In an open text format, applicants can describe how their participation in this event help increase diversity and representation of any marginalised and traditionally underrepresented group in the OVERALL open source bioinformatics and/or open science community.

Author: ```suggestion
In an open text response, applicants can describe how their participation in this event help increase diversity and representation of any marginalised and traditionally underrepresented group in the OVERALL open source bioinformatics and/or open science community.
```
